# Introduction

- Examples: FSA, M23, NLA, Franco's Nationalists, Yemen?
- Importance: not a huge percentage of cases, but present in many severe civil wars, and key drivers of broader conflict trajectory. Military rebels were first rebel groups in Syria, Libya, Yemen? - very possible that these cases of unrest would not have escalated to civil war had the military remained cohesive. In the DRC, M23 has prolonged the fighting in a country that otherwise seemed headed toward peace for the first time in over a decade.

When the Arab Spring protests spread to Syria in March 2011, the regime of President Bashar al-Assad quickly responded with forceful repression, including the torture and killing of a 13-year-old boy [@Macleod2011]. While this brutality was presumably intended to deter threats to the regime, it arguably backfired by provoking the defection of a substantial portion of the regime military including Colonel Hussein Harmoush, who expressed a feeling of complicity in the government actions, saying that "I defected from the Syrian Arab army and took responsibility for protecting civilians... I feel like I am responsible for the deaths of every single martyr in Syria," [@Abouzeid2011]. Riad al-Assad, who defected from the Syrian Air Force to form the Free Syrian Army rebel group, similarly declared his intent to protect protestors and resist the regime military [@Lister2016]. Several other contemporary rebel groups have similar origins, including M23 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the National Liberation Army in Libya, suggesting that the phenomenon could be widespread. This paper thus seeks to answer two question. First, does the use of repression place regimes at greater risk of desertion and coups? Second, under what conditions is repression most likely to produce such outcomes?

The fragmentation of the regime military is a key dynamic in many conflicts and potentially explains why the Arab Spring led to civil war in Syria and Libya, but not in other countries. Similar processes have occurred in numerous other cases, as original data presented herein shows that more than 15% of rebel groups since World War II have traced their origins to the regime military, and an additional 9% were founded by civilian regime officials. These rebellions have received little attention from scholars, and while some existing theories of civil war onset such as greed theory [@Collier2004] could potentially account for them, many, including theories focusing on ethnic discrimination [e.g. @Cederman2010] and protest escalation [e.g. @Pierskalla2010], assume that rebellions originate outside the government. Studying these cases thus offers the possibility of enhancing our understanding of civil war onset.

Another prominent form of regime fragmentation --- coups d'etat --- has been the subject of much scholarship. While most of the existing literature focuses on broader structural conditions affecting coup risk, some identify a connection between protests and coup occurrence [@Casper2014; @Johnson2018]. @Hendrix2017 consider the government's response to protests, finding that the possibility of regime fragmentation often deters the use of repression. Yet, fragmentation does occur, suggesting the need for further research analyzing fragmentation as a dependent variable. Additionally, deterrence effects create the possibility of endogeneity, but existing studies have not fully corrected for this concern. This study advances the literature on coups and repression by making coups a dependent variable, by accounting for the possibility of endogeneity through the use of an instrumental variable, and by examining a wider set of cases than previous studies.

This research also contributes to the literature on human rights. Understandably, most work in this area has focused on the causes of human rights violations. Several scholars, however, have turned their attention to the consequences of human rights violations for outcomes such as foreign direct investment [@Blanton2007] and foreign aid [@Lebovic2009], and others have suggested that repression could provoke infighting amongst regime factions [@Hendrix2017]. These consequences of human rights violations could offer insight to preventing abuses in the future. For example, if regime fragmentation has the potential to constrain abusive behavior [@Hendrix2017], disrupting the flow of private benefits to soldiers might undermine solidarity and strengthen this effect. By comparing specific mechanisms linking repression to regime fragmentation, this study offers the prospect of such policy recommendations.

I proceed with a review of the literature on regime fragmentation, including coups, rebellions, and desertion. Next, I articulate three theoretical processes that could link repression to regime fragmentation. I then specify a research design to test these propositions, and present results from fixed-effects and instrumental variables regression models. I conclude by situating the results in the broader literature, and by offering suggestions for future research.
